[Team 4] Report (#20)
SOMAS2021/SOMAS-Final-Report: 006_team_4_agent_design/006_team_4_agent_design.tex

\chapter{Team 4 Agent Design}\label{team_4_agent_design}

\section{Strategy Overview}
The overall agent strategy was determined by an evolutionary algorithm (see overview in \Cref{fig:evolutionOverview}) which allowed the agent to preemptively adapt to unknown environments. The evolutionary algorithm was further complemented by a trust score, which acted as a measure of the agent's perception of the trustworthiness of other agents in the tower. Additionally, the agent was given a cravings parameter which simulated how hunger would affect a human in the real world. This created a well-rounded agent that was able to dynamically adapt to the changing environment in order to survive. 

\begin{figure}[htb]
    \centering
    \includegraphics{006_team_4_agent_design/assets/evolution_overview.png}
    \caption{Overview of evolutionary algorithm.}
    \label{fig:evolutionOverview}
\end{figure}

\section{Evolutionary Algorithm}

> In the fundamentals of evolutionary algorithms, every agent has a set of genes (or genotypes), which can express themselves (as phenotypes) in the way the agent interacts with its surroundings. Therefore, the aim is to find the optimal genotypes that will give phenotypes that are deemed to be favourable. The way in which this is implemented is by seeing the performance of an agent according to a particular metric. This way the effect of each phenotype (and therefore underlying genotype) is put into perspective and ranked against the others. The most successful agents survive, while the less performant ones are killed off. When the surviving population reproduces, the resulting offspring will share the genes of both their parents, meaning they will have a mix of the most successful genotypes. Furthermore, there are some offspring with mutated genes and some that have identical genes to the previous generation for genetic variation. With this new population, the process is repeated to iteratively create more successful populations, as illustrated in \Cref{fig:team4evolve}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the fundamentals of evolutionary algorithms, every agent has a set of genes (or genotypes), which can express themselves (as phenotypes) in the way the agent interacts with its surroundings. Therefore, the aim is to find the optimal genotypes that will give phenotypes that are deemed to be favourable. This is implemented by seeing the performance of an agent according to a particular metric. This way the effect of each phenotype (and therefore underlying genotype) is put into perspective and ranked against the others. The most successful agents survive, while the less performant ones are killed off. When the surviving population reproduces, the resulting offspring will share the genes of both their parents, meaning they will have a mix of the most successful genotypes. Furthermore, there are some offspring with mutated genes and some that have identical genes to the previous generation for genetic variation. With this new population, the process is repeated to iteratively create more successful populations, as illustrated in \Cref{fig:team4evolve}.
```

\begin{figure}[htb]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth]{006_team_4_agent_design/assets/evolve.png}
    \caption{Population selection process in an evolutionary algorithm.}
    \label{fig:team4evolve}
\end{figure}

Hence, with the use of an evolutionary algorithm, the final agent was the culmination of multiple generations of populations, with the genes of successful ancestors having been propagated and mixed. This meant it was a well-adapted agent which was robust to the many environments it could encounter in the tower. 

\subsection{Agent Genotypes}
To use evolutionary algorithms optimally, the genotypes that evolve should be well defined. This section outlines the two genotypes that were chosen as they were deemed to have the most effect on the survival of an agent in the system.

\subsubsection{FoodtoEat}\label{FoodtoEat}

> \texttt{FoodToEat} was the amount of food the agent would eat on any given day of the simulation. Given the HP update curves in \Cref{updateHP}, it can be noted that any consumption past the threshold of 60 food had little to no effect on the HP gain of the agent. This meant that eating any more than that amount was wasteful and sub-optimal, so during the training process the algorithm was capped. This meant that the process could never learn to eat a value above 60, just as it could not learn to eat a value below 0.

Reviewer 2: might need to use `\textit{}` rather than `\texttt{}` depending on the final decision of the editors

Reviewer 3: What was the final decision regarding this? Will update inline with that

Reviewer 2: texttt is the final decision, sorry for the late answer

\subsection{Health Levels}
In order for these genotypes to be viable in the learning process, the values they could take had to be limited. The \texttt{FoodToEat} and \texttt{WaitProbability} were inherently limited to lie between 0-60 and 0-100 respectively, but there were many conditions under which the agent would have to choose between these values. It was decided that the agent's HP was the most apt factor in its decision making process. Hence, the agent's HP was divided up into different bands as a means of classifying the agent's current health into broader categories. The division resulted in four levels being created: Critical, Weak, Healthy and Strong with the range of HP corresponding to each level displayed in \Cref{tab:healthLevels}.

\begin{table}[htb]
    \centering
    \begin{tabular}{| c | c |}
    \hline
    Health Level & HP Range \\
    \hline
    \hline
     Critical & 3-9 \\ 
    \hline
     Weak &  10-39\\  
     \hline
     Healthy &  40-69\\
     \hline
     Strong & 70-100 \\
     \hline
    \end{tabular}
    \caption{Overview of the different health levels and their corresponding HP ranges.}
    \label{tab:healthLevels}
\end{table}

> In each health level, the agent would consume a certain amount of food with a given probability of waiting before eating. The division of HP into broader levels reduced the complexity of the learning process greatly as compared to when optimising food intake for every possible HP value, and was therefore chosen as a good compromise.

Reviewer 4: Consider 'band' instead of level for this section? Seems more appropriate since you're considering a range, as opposed to a singular HP level. Feel free to disagree

Reviewer 3: Yeah will change to bands for consistency with earlier in the section

\subsection{Cravings}

> To implement a more realistic and life-like element to the agent, a cravings trait was added. The cravings of the agent would be increased as the desire for food increases and decreased when the agent no longer desires food.

Reviewer 4: Is fine but can be more concise imo, feel free to disagree
```suggestion
To implement a more realistic and life-like element to the agent, a cravings trait was added. The cravings of the agent would be increased as the desire for food increases and decreased otherwise.
```

Cravings directly effected the \texttt{waitProbabilities} put forward in \Cref{waitProbability}. As days pass without seeing food on the platform, the agent's craving increases, and in turn, its probability of waiting to eat decreases. The intuition behind this was that as more days pass without seeing food, the agent should eat when it can as there may not be many opportunities to do so in the future and may potentially lead to death.\newline

An agent's craving was altered in a few different scenarios:
\begin{enumerate}
    \item Food not seen on the platform - If the agent has not seen food in $x$ days, cravings is increased by $x$. Otherwise, the craving is decreased by two for everyday food is seen on the platform. 

>     \item Eating food - When the agent eats food craving is decreased proportionally to the amount food the agent has eaten \emph{i.e.} $cravings = cravings \left(1 - \frac{foodeaten}{desiredfood}\right)$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item Eating food - When the agent eats food, craving is decreased proportionally to the amount of food the agent has eaten \emph{i.e.} $cravings = cravings \left(1 - \frac{foodeaten}{desiredfood}\right)$
```

>     \item Eating food - When the agent eats food craving is decreased proportionally to the amount food the agent has eaten \emph{i.e.} $cravings = cravings (1 - \frac{foodeaten}{desiredfood})$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    \item Eating food - When the agent eats food craving is decreased proportionally to the amount food the agent has eaten \emph{i.e.} $cravings = cravings \left(1 - \frac{foodeaten}{desiredfood}\right)$
```

Reviewer 2: Automatically size up the brackets according to their content

\end{enumerate}

> This enabled the agent to perform house-keeping as it reduced the likelihood of a scenario where the agent does not eat for long periods of time, preventing self-inflicted damage as a result of  \texttt{waitProbability}. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This enabled the agent to perform house-keeping as it reduced the likelihood of a scenario where the agent does not eat for long periods of time, preventing self-inflicted damage as a result of \texttt{waitProbability}. 
```

> It should be noted that the training process did not learn the values to assume in the critical region. These values were instead hard-coded as the agents 'survival instinct', whereby it ate what it needed to leave critical health. This added a component of self-healing to the agent.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It should be noted that the training process did not learn the values to assume in the critical region. These values were instead hard-coded as the agents `survival instinct', whereby it ate what it needed to leave critical health. This added a component of self-healing to the agent.
```

Reviewer 3: Not sure if you meant to change to a ` or not so haven't amended

\subsection{Treaties} \label{team4Treaties}
The agent accepted any subset of treaties that were in line with its own goals. The first few conditions were all dependent on the availableFood. In the case that the agent was within a threshold of the critical region (this being the critical health level multiplied by 2), the corresponding treaty was rejected. The agent also rejected any treaties where the condition was dependent on having available food less than a certain amount. Finally, all treaties requiring the agent to leave food less than the critical amount were rejected, so as to afford agents on lower levels of the tower the opportunity to survive if they were in critical condition. 

> Similarly, treaties were also subject to the condition of HP. The agent rejected all treaties where the conditional HP was less than the critical band. Here, the agent would be at the point of desperation and should not be forced into any action. Additionally, treaties may have been requested where the condition of the agent was required to be less than a certain HP, or the agent was required to be placed on a higher floor number. These would lead to a significant disadvantage for the agent as treaties are binding. Consequently, treaties with these conditions were all rejected. When the duration was greater than the maximum number of days in critical, it could lock the agent into a forced action resulting in its death. To ensure this didn't happen, we rejected all such opportunities. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, treaties were also subject to the condition of HP. The agent rejected all treaties where the conditional HP was less than the critical band. Here, the agent would be at the point of desperation and should not be forced into any action. Additionally, treaties may have been requested where the condition of the agent was required to be less than a certain HP, or the agent was required to be placed on a higher floor number. These would lead to a significant disadvantage for the agent as treaties are binding. Consequently, treaties with these conditions were all rejected. When the duration was greater than the maximum number of days in critical, it could lock the agent into a forced action resulting in its death. To ensure this didn't happen, the agent rejected all such opportunities. 
```

> Similarly, treaties were also subject to the condition of \textbf{HP}. The agent rejected all treaties where the conditional HP was less than the critical band. Here, the agent would be at the point of desperation and should not be forced into any action. Additionally, treaties may have been requested where the condition of the agent was required to be less than a certain HP, or the agent was required to be placed on a higher floor number. These would lead to a significant disadvantage for the agent as treaties are binding. Consequently, treaties with these conditions were all rejected. When the duration was greater than the maximum number of days in critical, it could lock the agent into a forced action resulting in its death. To ensure this didn't happen, we rejected all such opportunities. 

Reviewer 4: any reason why this HP is bolded?

Reviewer 3: No reason, will remove

\begin{figure}[htb]%
    \centering
    \subfloat[\centering Decrease in trust]{{\includegraphics[width=0.3\linewidth]{006_team_4_agent_design/assets/selfish.png}}}%
    \qquad
    \subfloat[\centering Increase in trust]{{\includegraphics[width=0.3\linewidth]{006_team_4_agent_design/assets/selfless.png}}}%
    \caption{Change in agent configuration as a result of global trust score.}%
    \label{fig:team4updateHP}%
\end{figure}

> Trust score for an agent was increased through a multitude of interactions. As the system was designed to be honest, the agent increased trust score when the floor above took a certain amount of food that was deemed to be an acceptable value (less than the maximum food taken in the selfish configuration) and communicated this to the agent. Additionally, when the floor below left a certain amount of food, the agent also increased its trust score.\\

Reviewer 4: do you need this \\ here

Reviewer 3: No I don't think so, will remove

> In the cases where the floor above left a certain amount of food and the agent below also took a certain amount of food, the agent did not instantaneously increase the trust score. Instead, the agent verified that the agents above and below followed through with the actions mentioned through the \texttt{verifyResponses} function. The agent used the function once it received replies to \texttt{RequestLeaveFood} and \texttt{RequestTakeFood} messages. Whenever a message was sent, it was stored by the agent. This allowed the agent to correspond replies and responses to the appropriate sent messages. All responses which were not in accordance with our agent's ideology, or were not replied to at all, were sanctioned through a decrease in the global trust score metric. A decrease in trust score led the agent to act more selfishly, which acted to the detriment of other agents. This meant that there was some form of punishment for antisocial behaviour from other agents to stop them destroying the social order constructed by the agent within the tower.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the cases where the floor above left a certain amount of food and the agent below also took a certain amount of food, the agent did not instantaneously increase the trust score. Instead, the agent verified that the agents above and below followed through with the actions mentioned through the \texttt{verifyResponses} function. The agent used the function once it received replies to \texttt{RequestLeaveFood} and \texttt{RequestTakeFood} messages. Whenever a message was sent, it was stored by the agent. This allowed the agent to correspond replies and responses to the appropriate sent messages. All responses which were not in accordance with the agent's ideology, or were not replied to at all, were sanctioned through a decrease in the global trust score metric. A decrease in trust score led the agent to act more selfishly, which acted to the detriment of other agents. This meant that there was some form of punishment for antisocial behaviour from other agents to stop them destroying the social order constructed by the agent within the tower.
```

In the case of the agent below taking food, the agent always stored the food left on the platform after they had eaten. When a response to a \texttt{RequestTakeFood} message was received from the below floor, the agent first checked whether the below agent had eaten through the function \texttt{neighbourFoodEaten}. As the food left on the platform was stored by the agent and the agent being able to see the food on the below platform through the function \texttt{CurrPlatFood}, the agent was able to verify that the agent below had been truthful. This was done by adding the food that the agent had supposedly taken to the food that was currently on the platform and verifying it against the food that had left this agent's platform.

> We updated the trust score based on the messages sent and received to and from other agents. This showcased self optimisation, since the agent chose a configuration to follow based on interactions with others and observation of their actions. We then used this trust score as an indicator of when to switch between our three different personalities. With high trust, our agent was inclined to be more selfless, and with low trust our agent was likely to be more selfish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The agent updated the trust score based on the messages sent and received to and from other agents. This showcased self optimisation, since the agent chose a configuration to follow based on interactions with others and observation of their actions. The agent then used this trust score as an indicator of when to switch between the three different personalities. With high trust, the agent was inclined to be more selfless, and with low trust the agent was likely to be more selfish.
```

In the case, where an agent did not respond to our sent messages, the trust score is decreased overall. This allowed the agent to be empowered in its action through logical reasoning as the agent was able to enforce a more selfish personality due to miscommunication. This further warranted our agent to sanction members within the local environment when they responded negatively to the agent's overall ideology of trying to create a selfless utopia. These actions allowed the agent to idealise Ostrom's fifth principle of sanctioning further as miscommunication is punished as it is deemed to be a necessity in the collaborative multi-agent system that the agent tries to create.

\begin{figure}[htb]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.85\textwidth]{006_team_4_agent_design/assets/JeremyPittTrustFramework.jpg}
    \caption{An illustration showing the formal model of the Trust Framework. \cite{JeremyPittSlides}}
    \label{fig:TrustFramework}
\end{figure}

> Trust score acted as an element of symbiosis between the learning-based evolutionary algorithm that the agent was originally employed with and a self-organising strategy. Additionally, it allowed the agent to improve on it's relatively static structure to become more dynamic so as to adapt to the changes in it's surrounding environment. This was advantageous as the agent was able to use its pre-defined metrics in tandem with trust score and cravings to adapt within the tower depending on its social construction of reality. The trust score enacted the formal model (as shown in \Cref{fig:TrustFramework}) of a trust framework whereby the opportunity to trust is employed through communication and action, whilst the quantity decision is made through every individual agent strategy. Through local trust based modelling of a global trust score, the agent is able to implement the outcome utilities portion of the trust framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trust score acted as an element of symbiosis between the learning-based evolutionary algorithm that the agent was originally employed with and a self-organising strategy. Additionally, it allowed the agent to improve on it's relatively static structure to become more dynamic so as to adapt to the changes in it's surrounding environment. This was advantageous as the agent was able to use its pre-defined metrics in tandem with trust score and cravings to adapt within the tower depending on its social construction of reality. The trust score enacted the formal model (as shown in \Cref{fig:TrustFramework}) of a trust framework whereby the opportunity to trust is employed through communication and action, whilst the quantity decision is made through every individual agent strategy. Through local trust based modelling of a global trust score, the agent is able to implement the outcome utilities portion of the trust framework.
```

> Trust score acted as an element of symbiosis between the machine learning-based evolutionary algorithm that the agent was originally employed with and a self-organising strategy. Additionally, it allowed the agent to improve on it's relatively static structure to become more dynamic so as to adapt to the changes in it's surrounding environment. This was advantageous as the agent was able to use its pre-defined metrics in tandem with trust score and cravings to adapt within the tower depending on its social construction of reality. The trust score enacted the formal model (as shown in \Cref{fig:TrustFramework}) of a trust framework whereby the opportunity to trust is employed through communication and action, whilst the quantity decision is made through every individual agent strategy. Through local trust based modelling of a global trust score, the agent is able to implement the outcome utilities portion of the trust framework.

Reviewer 4: I get what you're trying to say but maybe this is cleaner, feel free to disagree
```suggestion
Trust score acted as an element of symbiosis between the learning-based evolutionary algorithm that the agent was originally employed with and a self-organising strategy. Additionally, it allowed the agent to improve on it's relatively static structure to become more dynamic so as to adapt to the changes in it's surrounding environment. This was advantageous as the agent was able to use its pre-defined metrics in tandem with trust score and cravings to adapt within the tower depending on its social construction of reality. The trust score enacted the formal model (as shown in \Cref{fig:TrustFramework}) of a trust framework whereby the opportunity to trust is employed through communication and action, whilst the quantity decision is made through every individual agent strategy. Through local trust based modelling of a global trust score, the agent is able to implement the outcome utilities portion of the trust framework.
```

\section{Experimentation and Results}

\subsection{Baseline Comparisons}

> In order to evaluate the performance of our agent, it was compared to two baselines - the default agent and the random agent. The time taken for the system to stabilise (\emph{i.e.,} time taken for the agents to organise into a structure that led to no future deaths) into a viable social order was measured. Tests with homogeneous populations of Team 4 agents, default agents and random agents were conducted, which highlighted that the two baselines never stabilised, whilst the Team 4 agent did. This was evident from \Cref{fig:baselinecomps} which showed the number of deaths for the Team 4 agents eventually stagnating however, this did not occur for the other two agent types. This was because the agent was able to build a trustworthy local perception which resulted in a positive outlook of the environment, allowing all agents to tend towards selflessness. This selfless behaviour enacted utilitarianism as the agents were able to maximise the average food left on the platform after a day had passed, ensuring that there was no wastefulness, whilst the overall population was still able to survive. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to evaluate the performance of the agent, it was compared to two baselines - the default agent and the random agent. The time taken for the system to stabilise (\emph{i.e.,} time taken for the agents to organise into a structure that led to no future deaths) into a viable social order was measured. Tests with homogeneous populations of Team 4 agents, default agents and random agents were conducted, which highlighted that the two baselines never stabilised, whilst the Team 4 agent did. This was evident from \Cref{fig:baselinecomps} which showed the number of deaths for the Team 4 agents eventually stagnating however, this did not occur for the other two agent types. This was because the agent was able to build a trustworthy local perception which resulted in a positive outlook of the environment, allowing all agents to tend towards selflessness. This selfless behaviour enacted utilitarianism as the agents were able to maximise the average food left on the platform after a day had passed, ensuring that there was no wastefulness, whilst the overall population was still able to survive. 
```

> In order to evaluate the performance of our agent, it was compared to two baselines - the default agent and the random agent. The time taken for the system to stabilise (i.e time taken for the agents to organise into a structure that led to no future deaths) into a viable social order was measured. Tests with homogeneous populations of Team 4 agents, default agents and random agents were conducted, which highlighted that the two baselines never stabilised, whilst the Team 4 agent did. This was evident from \Cref{fig:baselinecomps} which showed the number of deaths for the Team 4 agents eventually stagnating however, this did not occur for the other two agent types. This was because the agent was able to build a trustworthy local perception which resulted in a positive outlook of the environment, allowing all agents to tend towards selflessness. This selfless behaviour enacted utilitarianism as the agents were able to maximise the average food left on the platform after a day had passed, ensuring that there was no wastefulness, whilst the overall population was still able to survive. 

Reviewer 4: i.e -> i.e.
```suggestion
In order to evaluate the performance of our agent, it was compared to two baselines - the default agent and the random agent. The time taken for the system to stabilise (i.e. time taken for the agents to organise into a structure that led to no future deaths) into a viable social order was measured. Tests with homogeneous populations of Team 4 agents, default agents and random agents were conducted, which highlighted that the two baselines never stabilised, whilst the Team 4 agent did. This was evident from \Cref{fig:baselinecomps} which showed the number of deaths for the Team 4 agents eventually stagnating however, this did not occur for the other two agent types. This was because the agent was able to build a trustworthy local perception which resulted in a positive outlook of the environment, allowing all agents to tend towards selflessness. This selfless behaviour enacted utilitarianism as the agents were able to maximise the average food left on the platform after a day had passed, ensuring that there was no wastefulness, whilst the overall population was still able to survive. 
```

\begin{figure}[htb]%
    \centering
    \subfloat[\centering 8 Team 4 agents with one selfish agent ]{{\includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{006_team_4_agent_design/assets/selfishRuns/oneOtherSelfish.png}}}%
    \qquad
    \subfloat[\centering 8 Team 4 agents with two selfish agents ]{{\includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{006_team_4_agent_design/assets/selfishRuns/twoOtherSelfish.png}}}%
    \caption{Impact of selfish agents on system stability}%
    \label{fig:selfishagentcomps}%
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[htb]%
    \centering
    \subfloat[\centering 8 Team 4 agents with one random agent ]{{\includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{006_team_4_agent_design/assets/randomRuns/oneOtherRandom.png}}}%
    \qquad
    \subfloat[\centering 8 Team 4 agents with two random agents ]{{\includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{006_team_4_agent_design/assets/randomRuns/twoOtherRandom.png}}}%
    \caption{Impact of random agents on system stability.}%
    \label{fig:randomagentcomps}%
\end{figure}

> Overall, it can be said that the culture of our evolutionary agent was very fragile and was easily effected by other more disruptive cultures.

Reviewer 4: is 'culture' more appropriate for this section or 'behaviour'?

Reviewer 3: It might be clearer to say strategy instead of culture, will amend this

    \begin{tabular}{|p{5em}|p{5em}|p{5em}|p{5em}|p{9em}|}
    \hline
        Other Agent Team & Number of Deaths & Our Deaths & Other Deaths & Compatible? (stabilises within 500 days) \\
         \hline
         \hline
        2 & 222 & 146 & 76 & No \\
         \hline
        3 & 82 & 59 & 23 & Yes \\
         \hline
        5 & 2 & 1 & 1 & Yes \\
         \hline
        6 & 259 & 161 & 98 & No \\
         \hline
        7 & 4 & 0 & 4 & Yes \\
         \hline
    \end{tabular}
    \caption{Table showing compatibility of various agent cultures with the evolutionary agent.}
    \label{tab:agentCompatibility}
\end{table}

In contrast, other agent types did not have as fortunate an outcome, and they were never really able to find a system that led to everyone surviving. It can be inferred subsequently that message passing and treaties themselves were not sufficient methods in these cases, and those agents' ideologies differed from the evolutionary agents by a great degree.

\section{Future Work}
Though the agent performed quite well in a homogeneous system, future work can be conducted to try and improve the agent's strategy. Some of the avenues for exploration are outlined below:

> 
> \begin{itemize}
>     \item Making agent more resilient to other disruptive cultures such as random agents 
>     \item Making the symbiosis of trust score and evolution more prevalent by including communications in the evolution process
>     \item Including more genotypes to learn during the evolutionary process
>     \item Including more complex treaty implementations to enforce Team 4 agent strategy.
> \end{itemize}

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
\begin{itemize}
    \item Making the agent more resilient to other disruptive cultures such as random agents.
    \item Making the symbiosis of trust score and evolution more prevalent by including communications in the evolution process.
    \item Including more genotypes to learn during the evolutionary process.
    \item Including more complex treaty implementations to enforce Team 4's agent strategy.
\end{itemize}
```
